大家好,我是陪你一起看世界的王霄。前段时间认识了一个美国左翼媒体人,他非常希望了解中国,我就想说一起聊一聊。
之前在动态里面和大家邀约了一些问题,还有对于美国一些问题的看法。
那天我们主要聊了关于美国当时比较热门的新闻,比如堕胎、持枪、教育。
其中教育聊得比较多,他说美国人上大学太贵了,结果很多人都还不起学贷。
我也提到中国的大学学费相对比较便宜,还提到了之前一个热搜,就是你只管拿着录取通知书去上学。
说的就是让家里贫困的孩子去上学,钱的事有很多解决的方法,千万不要因为觉得自己上不起就不去了。
我觉得这次聊天挺有意思的,就剪出来一段,跟大家一起分享一下。
Yeah, I mean, Albert, this other story that I really want to talk about is just, it's, I wouldn't say it's a particularly timely story, but it's coming up very soon.
At the end of August, we're going to have the student loan pause, which has been happening in the U.S.
all the student loans that people have taken out have been on pause because of the COVID pandemic.
And so the, you know, in the U.S., the average person and the average amount of money owed by a student is $32,000 each.
And there's about 43.3 million people in the U.S. who have student debt.
And so it's a really serious issue.
I mean, collectively, when you get into it all, student loan debt in 2022 in the U.S. is more than $1.7 trillion.
Like, it's really out of control.
And the average person in the U.S., you know, you really, you really can't afford these loans.
And so many people lost their jobs during the pandemic.
It's why they had to halt the payments, because you would not only make people go broke, but you would make them absolutely be unable to pay for housing, for food.
I mean, it would be a dire situation if we were forced to pay.
But I'm curious about what student loans are like in China.
If you guys have this kind of student debt and what education really looks like, because education in the U.S. is, it's fully, for the most part, like private.
Even the public schools, they cost so much money.
Like, it's out of control.
Like, public schools cost every single year about $10,000, $11,000 for state residents.
And if you're out of state going to a public state school, it's going to be almost $30,000 a year.
And so it's just, it's so much money to even go to a state school.
So there really isn't any sort of free or affordable option here in the U.S.
So I'm curious what it's like in China if you guys have this kind of debt problem, too.
Well, actually, we have student loan in China as well.
But the tuition fee in China is affordable for most families.
In most of the colleges and universities, it costs $5,000 to $8,000 RMB annually, which is like maybe around $1,000 to $1,500 American dollars annually for a bachelor's degree.
So including the top universities like Tsinghua University and the Peking Universities and for students who are major in education, policing, and willing to have a career in the public service departments.
There are also supportive programs for you.
For example, if you sign a contract with the government promising to work as a teacher in the last developed area after graduation, your tuition fee will be covered by the government.
Like completely covered?
Like they pay for everything?
Yeah, completely covered.
Oh, my God.
It's not that much money, right?
It's only like $1,000.
Yeah, but taking the living cost and accommodation fee into consideration, it's still too much for families from rural area.
So here's the case in China.
If you are from a poor family, the government will provide you a loan without any interest before graduation.
What you need to do is to pay the money back in two or three years after graduation.
And the interest rates after graduation is still very low.
It's very affordable.
Most of the students can pay it back within like six years, which is much more reasonable than it is in the United States like you mentioned before.
$10,000 tuition fee for a year, which takes 17 years for the students to pay back.
That's that's crazy.
That's crazy.
That's crazy.
And that's for state school.
OK, so that's like that's like what the average tuition is for schools that are private schools.
So like Harvard, Yale, like the big name schools, it is way more.
It's on average $38,000 for just tuition.
That's just tuition.
But I anecdotally will tell you it's more like $60,000 a year.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Another reason why I chose to go to University of Iowa is that they gave me a scholarship.
It's unbelievable.
For those students from low income families in China, universities provide scholarship as long as the students meet the grade requirements.
So if you study hard enough, you can like get a lot of support.
In addition, part time jobs are also open for these students in all the universities and the income could cover most of the living costs.
In short, as long as you work hard and get the offer, you get all the support from the university, the bank and the government without being trapped in any financial problem.
But when it comes to vocational education, we have some very deep rooted stereotype against it, which leads to less vocational education resources and current vocational schools are not running very well.
But in China, China is making a change on it.
We have special education resources.
We have schools for students with disabilities, and they are all included in the compulsory educational system.
If they are qualified, they can also take the college entrance exam.
And we have vocational schools for students who are physically challenged as well so that they can make their livings with dignities.
However, we only have nearly 2,300 special schools in China by 2021.
So there's room for improvement.
That is what we can take from the United States because actually the United States is very resourceful in this area.
Yeah, I mean, vocational education in the United States is available, but it's not widely available.
So, like, some places you'll have vocational high schools where you can go off and get trained to do, like, HVAC, like, air conditioning, electrician, like, being a company, electrician, a plumber.
There are a lot of vocations that are very, of course, necessary for society that we need more training on.
But there isn't, like, always clear pathways to it in terms of having access to that education.
Vocational schools are being shut down.
I mean, I think, you know, the thing in the United States is really that the emphasis of education has been going to college and going to university.
But the thing about university is that, like, at the end of the day, like, it doesn't even guarantee a job.
And so that's also kind of a big part of, I think, the challenges here in the U.S.
is that we do have more schools and a lot of those schools that we have more schools.
And a lot of the reason why we have more schools is because of the way that they ultimately sell their education in the U.S.
It's so like it's so hard, you know, like to go to school, like 30 percent of jobs in the U.S. require like one third of the jobs basically require you to have a degree of some sort.
And like, we just can't afford that.
You know, the average person in the U.S. makes like sixty thousand dollars a year.
But reality, like my life, people that I grew up with, people that I know, that's not what people make.
You know, people make minimum wage.
And so most poor people in the U.S., most average working class people in the U.S., you either don't go to school or you do go to school and you pretty much owe those loans for the rest of your life.
Like there's no way out.
There's no helping hands from the government asking you if, you know, if for you to apply somewhere, if you're if you really can't and actually cover it.
I mean, I just can't even imagine being a teacher and having that covered.
Like one of the number one issues here in education is the fact that teachers are drowning in student debt.
I think all education should be public.
I think all education should be public because private education, it's all predatory.
And especially if you're poor, they know that and they want to take advantage of that.
So they give you these jacked up loans from Sally Mae, which like anyone in the U.S. can tell you Sally Mae is like miserable to deal with.
It's like like it's like some people get literally 11.
I know people that have gotten 11 percent on their loans.
It's like you think a poor person can really pay back 11 percent on their loan.
Like that's not going to happen.
It's crazy.
It's so true.
I mean, what is the point of getting your people into that trap?
Right.
Like education is supposed to be like, I'm being very realistic here.
That education is supposed to be like training your people to become taxpayers.
What is the point to get them into that trap?
好了,那天我们聊得很长,这是其中的一部分.
之前在动态向大家征集看法的时候呢,有些人把美国媒体当上了CN.
其实美国媒体是一个非常繁荣,又很混乱的存在,立场千奇百怪.
很多美国媒体人并不代表美国政府,甚至是非常反对美国政府立场的。
所以下一次我们征集动态的时候呢,也欢迎大家抱着一个更加开放的心态去做讨论,
而不是把自己的立场嵌入到一个中美冲突的环境中。
期待大家可以让交流变得更加复杂,祝大家变得更强。
